Add Ansible AI Policy (#3588)
ansible/ansible-documentation: docs/docsite/rst/community/ai_policy.rst

.. _ai_policy:

******************************************************
Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions
******************************************************

> This policy uses the term "AI tool" to refer to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tools, that are generally built using the machine learning approach; examples include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI" as a widely understood shorthand. In practice, "AI" refers to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tools, that are generally built using the machine learning approach; examples include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

Reviewer: @webknjaz How do you feel about this rephrasing?

Reviewer 2: @oraNod I only contest the implication that it's understood correctly. The term is a moving target. For decades, if-else blocks were "AI", for example. I'd rather not have the policy misuse people's confusion of the meaning of "intelligence". And so when I look at this, I feel like the purpose of the document is again marketing.

Reviewer: @webknjaz As I hope you know I always appreciate your comments and insightful reviews. It seems like my suggestion was merged so I can't edit it as part of this thread.

Let me ask you though. When you say "when I look at this" are you referring to this specific paragraph or the entirety of the policy document?

Reviewer: How about this rephrasing?

This policy uses the term "AI" as shorthand for technology that is generally built using the machine learning approach. In this sense the term "AI" can refer to any assistive tools, including those considered as autonomous and semi-autonomous, such as large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: We could even consider a closing sentence along the lines of:

Whether or not the term "AI" is used correctly when referring to such tools is beyond the scope of this policy document.

Reviewer 2: I was mostly unhappy about the implication in the sentence that tries to define AI.. This will do, I think.

Reviewer: Thanks @webknjaz submitted the change. I left out that additional sentence. It seems like too much.

Reviewer 2: Ack

> This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive technology as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such AI include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling, that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such AI tools include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

Reviewer: Maybe saying "assistive tools" is better than "assistive technology", which refers more to screen readers and so on.

> This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling, that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such tools include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI tool" to refer to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tools, that are generally built using the machine learning approach; examples include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

> This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling, that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such AI tools include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling, that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such tools include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

This policy applies to the following projects and resources:

1. All public projects under Ansible organizations on code version control platforms such as GitHub. For example, the `ansible <https://github.com/ansible>`_, `ansible-community <https://github.com/ansible-community>`_, `ansible-collections <https://github.com/ansible-collections>`_ organizations.
2. Public communication platforms and channels listed in the :ref:`Ansible communication guide<communication>` such as Ansible Forum, official Matrix channels, and GitHub discussions.

> The above projects and resources **MAY have their own AI policies** which MAY expand or be more restrictive than this policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
..note:: The above projects and resources **MAY have their own AI policies** which MAY expand or be more restrictive than this policy.
```

> For the purposes of this document, "contribution submission" includes, but is not limited to, opening issues, pull requests with code or documentation changes, discussion, making comments, posts and alike.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purposes of this document, "contribution submission" includes, but is not limited to, opening issues, creating pull requests with code or documentation changes, participating in discussions, making comments, creating posts in the forum, and other related activities.
```

Reviewer: Could we put this at the bottom of the policy doc? Similar to a footnote. I feel like this gets in the way of the actual policy when I read through it. It's "terms and conditions" that could come later in the policy. Otherwise you have to wade through all the qualifiers before you get to the actual details.

Author: SGTM, something like https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes/01de8112bd614edbc47951c425be6b67dce53f90 ?

> 1. Contributors MUST be human and MAY use assistance of AI tools for contributing [1]_ to the above projects and resources, provided that they take full responsibility for their contributions and follow the principles described in this policy.

Reviewer 3: What is meant by "Contributors MUST be human"? Or, asking a different way, what's an example of a contributor that doesn't meet this criteria?

Author: For example, an AI bot autonomously submitting PRs (also see p. 4 including its subpoint)

Reviewer: It's a good question and one I've been thinking about as well. Would bots such as `ansible-documentation-bot` fall into this category?

Maybe we can drop the "MUST be human" detail because point 4 covers autonomous contributions, which is what I think this phrasing hints at.

Author: SGTM, removed, thanks

> 1. Contributors MUST be real humans and MAY use assistance of AI tools for contributing to the above projects and resources, as long as they take full responsibility for their contributions and follow the principles described in this policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Contributors MUST be human and MAY use assistance of AI tools for contributing to the above projects and resources, provided that they take full responsibility for their contributions and follow the principles described in this policy.
```

Reviewer: I think we can just say "human" here tbh. I guess we're saying "human not bot" but that's implied in a way that is clunky. For my money, saying "human" also implies no bots.

> 2. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance. This document seeks to clarify tool-specific considerations but in no way replaces the governing documents and good contributing practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST adhere to any specific project or platform standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance. This document seeks to clarify tool-specific considerations but in no way replaces the governing documents and good contributing practices.
```

3. Contributors are fully accountable for the contributions they make with or without AI assistance. This also applies to persons who authorize actions initiated by AI tools.

> 4. All autonomous contributions submitted by AI tools MAY be rejected by resource maintainers without any justification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Any autonomous contributions submitted by AI tools MAY be rejected by resource maintainers without prior justification.
```

5. The use of AI tools SHOULD be explicitly disclosed by the author when a significant part of the contribution is taken from the AI tools output without significant changes. Grammar, spelling, and stylistic corrections do not need disclosure.

   a. For code contributions, the contributor MAY use a short commit message trailer.
   b. For other contributions, disclosure MAY include a short preamble.
   c. We recommend using the following statement as a disclosure: Assisted-by: followed by any information about the contributor’s use of AI tools that they consider relevant, for example:

      i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
      ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6
      iii. Assisted-by: locally trained model

> Possible policy violations should be reported via ``ansible-community@redhat.com``.

Reviewer 3: Should this usage of "should" be in all caps?

Reviewer: I don't think so. It might even be worth putting this bit under a distinct heading to create a separate section from the main policy statements.

Author: @oraNod SGTM, moved it to a distinct section "Reporting policy violations". PTAL

Reviewer: Thanks @Andersson007 I think that is an improvement.

> Possible policy violations should be reported via ``ansible-community@redhat.com``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policy violations should be reported via ``ansible-community@redhat.com``.
```

>    c. We recommend using the following statement as a disclosure: Assisted-by: followed by any information about the contributor’s use of AI tools that they consider useful to disclose, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   c. We recommend using the following statement as a disclosure: Assisted-by: followed by any information about the contributor’s use of AI tools that they consider relevant, for example:
```

The key words "MAY", "MUST", "MUST NOT", and "SHOULD" in this document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.

This AI policy was adapted from AI policies of other open source projects, including:

* The Fedora Project
* The Linux Foundation

> .. [1] For the purposes of this document, "contribution submission" includes, but is not limited to, opening issues, creating pull requests with code or documentation changes, participating in discussions, making comments, creating posts in the forum, and other related activities.

Reviewer 3: The quoted term "contribution submission" isn't actually used elsewhere in this document. Was it supposed to refer to something else?

Author: @mattclay good point, [changed](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes/7e350f29337ab7c89eff71678abab7650d9be9fc) the wording, PTAL

.. _ai_policy:

******************************************************

> Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions

Reviewer 2: Given that "ai" is a marketing term for random output generators, it'd be wise to define what it means in the context of this doc.

Author: I personally feel no confusion here, though if people think some non-verbose clarifications would be necessary here, any suggestions are welcome
btw, there the same comment below.

Reviewer 2: Right, sometimes this new PR review interface or the GH mobile app would double-post things. I'll mark this thread as resolved.

> Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions

Reviewer 2: Given that "ai" is a marketing term for random output generators, it'd be wise to define what it means in the context of this doc.

Reviewer 4: How about something like:

> In the context of this policy, "AI" refers to Large Language Models (LLMs) and AI agents utilized for contributions to Ansible ecosystem projects.

Do we need to go into greater details? With examples of tooling etc?

Author: @dbrennand IMO we shouldn't go into greater details to keep the policy general enough and as concise as possible

Author: I also wonder if we should restrict this with LLMs or keep it general. How about logo generation? I'm not an expert. Can, say, pictures be generated by some non-LLMs specialized models? Remember that it's not only about text/code generation (UPDATE: imo)

Reviewer 2: I guess I'm just not a fan of whatever "AI" means on a given day. Especially that "intelligence" claim.

2. All projects which are hosted in third-party organizations and are part of Ansible-related distributions. For example, Ansible collections which are part of the Ansible community package.
3. Communication platforms and channels listed in the :ref:`Ansible communication guide<communication>` such as Ansible Forum, official Matrix channels, and GitHub discussions.

The above projects and resources **MAY have their own AI policies** which MAY expand or be more restrictive, but not contradicting this policy.

For the purposes of this document, "contribution submission" includes, but is not limited to, opening issues, pull requests with code or documentation changes, discussion, making comments, posts and alike.

1. Contributors MUST be real humans and MAY use assistance of AI tools for contributing to the above projects and resources, as long as they take full responsibility for their contributions and follow the principles described in this policy.
2. Contributors are always authors and are fully accountable for the contributions they make with or without AI assistance.

>    a. A contributor, including a person who authorized an action initiated by an AI tool, MUST take responsibility for their contributions assisted by AI and AI-initiated actions.

Reviewer 2: The formatting in this list is off w/ no empty line separator after it but some before.

Author: Changed, thanks

3. Contributions MUST NOT be submitted by AI agents.

   a. All autonomous contributions submitted by AI tools MAY be rejected by resource maintainers as violating this policy.
   b. An exception to this rule is AI tools usage by the resource maintainers for validation and automation purposes, for example, automatic releasing, testing, spam filtering, AI contribution detection. Such actions MUST be reviewed and manually authorized by resource maintainers.
4. The use of AI tools MUST be explicitly disclosed by the author when a significant part of the contribution is taken from the AI tools output without significant changes. Grammar, spelling, and stylistic corrections do not require disclosure.

   a. For code contributions, the contributor MUST use a commit message trailer.

>    b. For other contributions, disclosure MUST include a preamble.

Reviewer 2: This may end up being a gateway to a lot of text (LLMs are known to generate texts way larger than necessary).

Author: Unfortunately, yes. It's imo inevitable anyway. This policy gives flexibility for individual projects to accept vibe coding or define stricter policies if they want.

Reviewer 2: I'm concerned about unreasonably huge vibed preambles mainly.

Author: There are examples in sub-point c. a bit below:
```
c. The commit message trailers and preamble SHOULD use the following statement as a disclosure: ``Assisted-by:`` followed by the model name, its version, and tool name (optional), for example:
 i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
 ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6
 iii. Assisted-by: Claude Code (Opus 4.6)
 iv. Assisted-by: Cursor (Opus 4.6)
```
So we recommend this format. We could make it a must, not sure. What others think?

Reviewer 2: The important bit is that "a must" would be turning some potential contributors away before they start so such wording should be used with care.

[Here](https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools/pull/2318#discussion_r2838401756) we've been debating how to ask for the LLM use details and one aspect of feedback that stood up to me was that having the specific model+tool might be useful but generic things don't really have value.

Author: @webknjaz , sounds valid to me, do you have any specific wording changes suggestions on your mind?

Reviewer 2: I don't know if this should be specific to llm/"ai" tooling as it's always going to be behind on tech details. We could also ask if somebody used Vim or Emacs with the same level of usefulness (none). This should probably be a generic "if you used something unconventional/interesting — tell us", the same way if somebody tries out a new formatter or linter. Otherwise, it's bound to be outdated.

Currently, this line is not specific instruction-wise. I don't see a preamble example so this is rather vague. It's still good to have some guidance steering people to be transparent about the tooling while still focusing on optimizing for reviewers regardless of said tooling: https://lore.kernel.org/ksummit/20251114183528.1239900-1-dave.hansen@linux.intel.com/. Strictly speaking, tooling doesn't matter. It may be interesting to curious parties but what's important is whether the submission is reasonable. No matter if it's automatic or crafted manually.

So I'd focus on making sure there's clear instructions regarding the deliverable but not usage constraints.

---

This is a part of the reason I was avoiding calling a document "AI policy" or even just mentioning a "policy" in pip-tools. After all, the goal is to respect maintainer time which is a part of the social contract between the contributors and reviewers.

Author: I see the point, though many community maintainers would love to see the AI use disclosure and it also aligns with Red Hat policy.
Trying to address the concerns in [this suggestions below](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588#pullrequestreview-4119529545)

Reviewer 2: > though many community maintainers

Many is not each and every one. As long as this document has provisions to demand those who of a different opinion to do things they find inherently counterproductive, it's not something that should be accepted. This document should either allow an opt-out mechanism for the maintainers or stop including demands that can be seen as harmful.

Author: So the change MUST -> SHOULD would solve the problem? otherwise, please suggest edits

Reviewer 2: "MAY" or "is suggested/encouraged to". Or "here's how some people include info". Still, instructing how to contribute feels like a "contributing thing", not an "ai thing".

   c. The commit message trailers and preamble SHOULD use the following statement as a disclosure: ``Assisted-by:`` followed by the model name, its version, and tool name (optional), for example:

      i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
      ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6
      iii. Assisted-by: Claude Code (Opus 4.6)
      iv. Assisted-by: Cursor (Opus 4.6)

> 5. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards including code of conduct and license compliance.

Reviewer 2: Call out existing conventions explicitly too?

Author: I think the word `standards` is flexible and should cover everything maintainers thinks of as their project conventions. CoC and license are mentioned explicitly because they are always there and have extraordinary importance

Reviewer 2: Conventions can cover tribal knowledge and unwritten expectations, though.

Reviewer 4: Would this work?

```suggestion
5. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance.
```

6. AI MUST NOT be used as the sole arbiter to make final judgments and decisions on people or their contributions, for example, Code of Conduct matters, project board elections, package content acceptance.

> 7. This policy does not apply to major AI-driven changes to a specific project’s direction, workflows, codebase, or high-volume automated contributions. Such changes require separate discussion and approval by the leadership of the affected project.

Reviewer 2: *self-note:* this reads like an invitation to mass-contribute potential spam.

Reviewer 5: I think the "Such changes require separate discussion and approval by the leadership of the affected project." makes it clear that spam isn't allowed.

But maybe there should be another sentence that unsolicited mass-submissions can result in rejection without considering the content, and ban of the involved persons who are accountable for the spam.

Author: @felixfontein maybe, any specific wording suggestions? by you or by anybody else, but agents;)

Author: What about adding the following sentence:
```
Mass-submissions can result in rejection as spam without considering the content, and in a ban of the involved profiles accountable for the submissions.
```
WDYT?

Reviewer: A bit of wordsmithing for your day:

Unsolicited mass submissions of AI-generated contributions may be rejected without consideration of their content, and the accounts responsible may be banned.

Author: @oraNod , added, thanks a lot!
folks, please take another look

Reviewer 2: > Unsolicited mass submissions of AI-generated contributions

@oraNod do we also need to ban the pre-existing spam practice of automating mass-contributions w/o "ai", then? Why special-case LLMs?

Reviewer 5: @webknjaz this isn't an exclusive list of why we ban users, and this document is about AI/LLM contributions.

Reviewer 2: @felixfontein yes, however this seems to be something that could be formalized in a tool-agnostic way (as in they would apply just the same if you `s/LLM/<tool-name>/g`) and so it feels like this is special-casing something that should be global.

Possible policy violations should be reported via ``ansible-community@redhat.com``.

> The key words "MAY", "MUST", "MUST NOT", and "SHOULD" in this document are to be interpreted as described in `RFC 2119 <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119>`_.

Reviewer 2: Sphinx has a dedicated RST role for this
```suggestion
The key words "MAY", "MUST", "MUST NOT", and "SHOULD" in this document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.
```

.. _ai_policy:

******************************************************
Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions
******************************************************

> This policy uses the term "AI" as a widely understood shorthand. In practice, "AI" refers to any assistive tools, as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tools, that are generally built using the machine learning approach; examples include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI" as shorthand for technology that is generally built using the machine learning approach. In this sense the term "AI" can refer to any assistive tools, including those considered as autonomous and semi-autonomous, such as large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

4. Any autonomous contributions submitted by AI tools MAY be rejected by resource maintainers without prior justification.

   a. Autonomous actions performed by AI tools used by resource maintainers for validation and automation purposes (for example, automatic releasing, testing, spam filtering, and AI contribution detection) SHOULD be reviewed and manually authorized by the maintainers.

5. The use of AI tools SHOULD be explicitly disclosed by the author when a significant part of the contribution is taken from the AI tools output without significant changes. Grammar, spelling, and stylistic corrections do not need disclosure.

   a. For code contributions, the contributor MAY use a short commit message trailer.
   b. For other contributions, disclosure MAY include a short preamble.
   c. We recommend using the following statement as a disclosure: Assisted-by: followed by any information about the contributor’s use of AI tools that they consider relevant, for example:

      i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
      ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6

>       iii. Assisted-by: locally trained model

Reviewer 2: Prior art, FTR:
- https://docs.kernel.org/process/coding-assistants.html#attribution
- https://aiattribution.github.io/

.. _ai_policy:

******************************************************
Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions
******************************************************

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

In the context of this policy, "AI" refers to Large Language Models (LLMs) and AI agents utilized for contributions to Ansible ecosystem projects.

```

Reviewer 4: Based on https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes#r3078100097

Author: What about this [comment](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588#discussion_r3078149040), @dbrennand ? I wonder if LLM is a too narrow term

Reviewer 4: We can modify the wording to mention image models too? Would that work?

> In the context of this policy, "AI" refers to Large Language Models (LLMs), image models and AI agents utilized for contributions to Ansible ecosystem projects.

Author: @dbrennand should we instead make it general? I'd avoid restricting this policy to only LLMs and image generators. Who knows what can show up in future (there are already tons of models for all kinds of stuff)

Reviewer 4: 🤔 Hmmm, what about:

> In the context of this policy, "AI" encompasses all artificial intelligence tools, models, and automated agents utilized for contributions to Ansible ecosystem projects.

Reviewer 2: Would this summarize the point?

> While this policy uses the "AI" marketing term, it applies to any assisting, autonomous and semi-autotomous tooling that is generally built using the machine learning approach used to interact with the Ansible ecosystem projects, such as LLMs, text/image generators and agentic systems available as a public service or trained locally by the contributors.

Author: SGTM, please suggest the change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

While this policy uses the "AI" marketing term, it applies to any assisting, autonomous and semi-autotomous tooling that is generally built using the machine learning approach used to interact with the Ansible ecosystem projects, such as LLMs, text/image generators and agentic systems available as a public service or trained locally by the contributors.

```

Reviewer 4: Thanks @webknjaz 🙏🏻 🙂

This policy applies to the following projects and resources:

> 1. All projects under Ansible organizations on code version control platforms such as GitHub. For example, the `ansible <https://github.com/ansible>`_, `ansible-community <https://github.com/ansible-community>`_, `ansible-collections <https://github.com/ansible-collections>`_ organizations.

Reviewer 3: The scope of this policy should probably be limited to public projects.

Even then, I'm concerned the scope of this policy results in it affecting project maintainers who are unaware of its existence, and thus are unable to give their input. To put this in perspective, as currently written, this policy applies to over 500 public repositories, and over 100 non-public repositories.

Author: Good point, added `public`, thanks.
There's a note a bit below that projects can have their own AI policies. Doesn't it solve the second problem?

Reviewer 2: Given that there's a disclosure format demand paired with the contradictions being forbidden, this document must be mainly permissive and very careful when it comes to who it applies to and what it disallows. So there should be a framework to guide the maintainers, but not restrict how they maintain projects. For example, in https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes#r3101268998 I outlined why focusing on the implementation detail (the commit trailers or a specific disclosure formula) is wrong. And so I would definitely want this not to be demanded in the project over actually explaining things that are useful for the reviewers.

Reviewer 4: > The scope of this policy should probably be limited to public projects.

@mattclay The latest draft from @Andersson007 clarifies this only applies to public repositories.

> Even then, I'm concerned the scope of this policy results in it affecting project maintainers who are unaware of its existence, and thus are unable to give their input. 

We have communicated this policy draft internally and externally, via all channels we have available, including the Forum and Matrix. We've done our very best to raise awareness of the policy draft as much as we can.

2. All projects which are hosted in third-party organizations and are part of Ansible-related distributions. For example, Ansible collections which are part of the Ansible community package.
3. Communication platforms and channels listed in the :ref:`Ansible communication guide<communication>` such as Ansible Forum, official Matrix channels, and GitHub discussions.

> The above projects and resources **MAY have their own AI policies** which MAY expand or be more restrictive, but not contradicting this policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above projects and resources **MAY have their own AI policies** which MAY expand or be more restrictive, but not contradict this policy.
```

Author: I'm not sure. I think "contradicting" is an adjective here, i.e. "be more restrictive and not contradicting". Though I'm not an expert. Could you help @oraNod ?

Reviewer 2: However, “to be” and “to expand” are verbs: “*expand* or *be* <X>, but not <Y>” lists actions. Actions are generally represented by verbs. I.e. I parsed this as “may expand”, “may be”, “may not contradict”. If you wanted to make it an adjective, I suppose it'd work in a dependent clause.

Author: Ok, committing, thanks for clarifying

For the purposes of this document, "contribution submission" includes, but is not limited to, opening issues, pull requests with code or documentation changes, discussion, making comments, posts and alike.

1. Contributors MUST be real humans and MAY use assistance of AI tools for contributing to the above projects and resources, as long as they take full responsibility for their contributions and follow the principles described in this policy.

> 2. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance.

Reviewer 2: I'd make it clear that those documents and conventions are more important.

```suggestion

2. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance. This document seeks to clarify tool-specific considerations but in no way replaces the governing documents and good contributing practices.

```

   a. A contributor, including a person who authorized an action initiated by an AI tool, MUST take responsibility for their contributions assisted by AI and AI-initiated actions.

>    3. Contributions MUST NOT be submitted by AI agents.

Reviewer 6: As an organization where we are already using AI to create pull requests, review them, etc., this doesn't feel in line with that. Or maybe it needs clarifying around what AI-based automations are allowed.

Author: @jeffh-oss thanks for raising this, I believe it's covered  and clarified in p. 3 b., specifically:
"b. An exception to this rule is AI tools usage by the resource maintainers for validation and automation purposes, for example, automatic releasing, testing, spam filtering, AI contribution detection. Such actions MUST be reviewed and manually authorized by resource maintainers."

Is it what you mean we need here?

Reviewer 2: I also think that `b.` covers this. Also, it's up to upstreams what to allow, having a global limitation would be counterproductive — the maintainers would know better anyway.

Reviewer 5: I agree that b) should cover this. Using agents to create PRs by maintainers is totally fine, even if they act autonomous. Using agents by random other users to create PRs is only OK if they check everything before bothering maintainers with it. Maintainers shouldn't (excessively) have to clean up messes caused by others without invitation/approval.

Reviewer 6: Thanks all. Not having a global limitation makes sense as @webknjaz stated.

>    3. Contributions MUST NOT be submitted by AI agents.

Reviewer 5: The indentation is off:
```suggestion
3. Contributions MUST NOT be submitted by AI agents.
```

Author: Thanks @felixfontein !

   a. All autonomous contributions submitted by AI tools MAY be rejected by resource maintainers as violating this policy.
   b. An exception to this rule is AI tools usage by the resource maintainers for validation and automation purposes, for example, automatic releasing, testing, spam filtering, AI contribution detection. Such actions MUST be reviewed and manually authorized by resource maintainers.

4. The use of AI tools MUST be explicitly disclosed by the author when a significant part of the contribution is taken from the AI tools output without significant changes. Grammar, spelling, and stylistic corrections do not require disclosure.

   a. For code contributions, the contributor MUST use a commit message trailer.

>    b. For other contributions, disclosure MUST include a preamble.

Author: ```suggestion
   a. For code contributions, the contributor MUST use a short commit message trailer (see the recommended format in p. "c").
   b. For other contributions, disclosure MUST include a short preamble (see the recommended format in p. "c").
```

   c. The commit message trailers and preamble SHOULD use the following statement as a disclosure: ``Assisted-by:`` followed by the model name, its version, and tool name (optional), for example:

      i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
      ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6
      iii. Assisted-by: Claude Code (Opus 4.6)

>       iv. Assisted-by: Cursor (Opus 4.6)

Reviewer 7: Is there a recommended format for models without a publicly branded name/versions? I'm curious about LLMs bundled with IDEs for things like autocomplete  (would I attribute the IDE version?), and locally trained models.

Author: Maybe we could replace one of the examples with something like `Assisted-by: Locally trained model` ?

Author: Please see https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588#discussion_r3091930997
About tooling: the format is recommended, not a must. Let's keep it flexible. I'd avoid trying to cover many cases there to keep it concise

Reviewer 7: > Maybe we could replace one of the examples with something like Assisted-by: Locally trained model ?

I wish it was more specific about the type of model, but I don't have a concrete suggestion. As a reviewer, I'd like to know the algorithm/heuristics used to generate the fix. This document seems very LLM-centric instead of general to AI.

>       iv. Assisted-by: Cursor (Opus 4.6)

Author: ```suggestion
   c. The commit message trailers and preamble SHOULD use the following statement as a disclosure: ``Assisted-by:`` followed by the model name and its version, for example:

      i. Assisted-by: gpt-5.4
      ii. Assisted-by: Opus 4.6
      iii. Assisted-by: locally trained model
```

Reviewer 2: Looks like this might address @s-hertel's concern but only partially — having a trailer does not necessarily reveal how exactly the model's been used (for example, Claude chat would work differently than Claude Code with the same model due to a bunch of differing logic wrapping the interaction, AFAIK) and how the outcome's been processed (whether the contributor's actually reviewed the generated thing and put it into the project context with care and attention to detail).

Strictly speaking, I don't imagine most people would care about the tooling in use unless they can reproduce the process and the contributor can explain it in detail, accurately, in context, using their own words.

It's an equivalent of “while in NeoVim, I used a mechanical Keychron K8 keyboard to type in stuff and then, I clicked a button with my Kensington trackball to submit a PR” — the statement might be accurate and list the tools exactly but still provides zero insight beyond showing off (which has its audience but isn't universally useful).

What's important is that the contributor is directed to respect the cognitive effort invested by the reviewers by following the contrib conventions and actively working to make their patches maintainable/readable/reviewable while stripping off any noise that mechanical tooling may introduce. They must be the first reviewer of whatever's generated and shield the project maintainers from slop.

If the technical details of using automatic/agentic tooling have significance, it's useful to reveal this regardless of whether the tools can be categorized as LLMs, or code formatters, or a one-time mass-replacement script. What's essential is being able to shed the light on the methodology.

Looking at this trailer demand, it seems like that small mention of the contrib guidelines in `5.` is an afterthought, while I believe it to be a core of any acceptable contribution, while `4.` goes after low-level technical details of a very narrow subset of contributions.

Author: @webknjaz would you like to submit some specific changes here?

Reviewer 2: It's difficult to formalize, which is why there may be a suggestion on how these things can be documented, but it mustn't be a MUST (in the context of the project maintainers being unable to override such a problematic demand). Imagine if the `CONTRIBUTING.md` files that tend to include a bunch of Git commands to help contributors get started and set up their dev env also included a policy that it's not allowed to use one's editor's UI button to make commits but only use the terminal. This sounds silly, but this is exactly how this policy reads.

One other reason I can't really come up with a specific suggestion to include is that it mainly doesn't really belong here — such instructions should live in `CONTRIBUTING.md` and supporting documents, not in an "ai" policy. This policy shouldn't re-explain every convention with the "ai" appended to the text, it should make sure, though, that `CONTRIBUTING.md` does take precedence and steer people there.

It's good that this document has "this are the list of things you can be banned for" but it should operate generally applicable concepts in the scope, while avoiding directing "this is how you must press the editor buttons".

> 5. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance.

Reviewer 2: This should probably go to the top of the list and be made more prominent.

Author: Moved to the second position, PTAL https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes/c02b7e1a071a947ff62ceef28498a120923938d0

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes#r3110697420

Author: LGTM, committed, thanks

> 5. All contributions assisted by AI tools MUST meet a specific project’s or platform’s standards, conventions and contributing guidelines, including code of conduct and license compliance.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is out-of-scope for this policy, but there's basically nothing here on the licensing conflicts that can arise from machine generated code contributions. If a contribution is significantly or wholly machine generated, it's probably not eligible for copyright protection, which can affect the ability to apply a license to that contribution. I don't know if relying on git blame is sufficient for being able to identify such code (assuming the commit message indicates this is the case), or if something further is required.

Author: we had some statements about the licensing conflicts in our original draft, but:
- legal thinks it's not practically useful to have it
- we decided to just refer license compliance because any contributions must comply, so, yes, licensing related regulations are out-of scope

6. AI MUST NOT be used as the sole arbiter to make final judgments and decisions on people or their contributions, for example, Code of Conduct matters, project board elections, package content acceptance.

> 7. This policy does not apply to major AI-driven changes to a specific project’s direction, workflows, codebase, or high-volume automated contributions. Such changes require separate discussion and approval by the leadership of the affected project. Unsolicited mass submissions of AI-generated contributions may be rejected without consideration of their content, and the accounts responsible may be banned.

Reviewer 3: This feels overly restrictive and verbose for project maintainers. It doesn't seem appropriate to try to list out exactly what project maintainers can and cannot do with their own projects, especially when they may have had zero input in the formation of this policy (see my other comment).

Author: We should have a policy. This one was inspired by Fedora's one.
Maintainers of projects that are unaware (though we made announcements in engineering channels) can create their own policies or suggest changes to this one.

Any specific suggestions to make specific changes  to statements that people see controversial would be much appreciated now.
IMO statements like necessary human gating of stuff submitted by bots or an option to unconditionally reject bot-submitted contributions aren't much controversial - this is what this policy is supposed to define.

.. _ai_policy:

******************************************************
Ansible Community Policy for AI-Assisted Contributions
******************************************************

> While this policy uses the "AI" marketing term, it applies to any assisting, autonomous and semi-autotomous tooling that is generally built using the machine learning approach used to interact with the Ansible ecosystem projects, such as LLMs, text/image generators and agentic systems available as a public service or trained locally by the contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This policy uses the term "AI" to apply to any assistive technology as well as autonomous and semi-autonomous tooling that is generally built using the machine learning approach. Examples of such AI include large language models (LLMs), text or image generators, and agentic systems that are available as a service or trained locally.
```

Reviewer: I'd trim some of this out because some of it seems superfluous. Also saying "AI marketing term" sounds like it was written with disdain and detracts from the intent of the rest of the text.

Author: @oraNod SGTM, committing, thanks!

Reviewer 2: @oraNod I kinda disagree: I was hoping that the document would convey that its authors understand what "AI" is instead of making the policy a yet another marketing document.

Reviewer: @webknjaz I see your point. The term "AI" is not really precise.

When I read the original phrasing with "marketing term" it came across more like we were editorializing than defining. In my opinion there was a dismissive tone that undermined the rest of the policy.

I feel like we need to be more neutral. What about something like this:

"This policy uses the term "AI" as a widely understood shorthand."

Reviewer 2: Dunno. I'd say it's widely misunderstood and exploited for marketing (the misunderstanding is).

Reviewer: 100% agree but it's all over the place, like the word "agentic". There's no true agency with "AI agents".

I've rephrased it in this suggestion: https://github.com/ansible/ansible-documentation/pull/3588/changes#r3129088266

I feel we should just stick with saying that AI is common parlance for specific technology without trying to make too many distinctions. Maybe the main thing here is to be clear that we haven't drank the AI marketing kool-aid. Probably don't want to go too hard with that at the same time.
